
CHAPTER V. A Useful Minister--In Church--The Climax
CHAPTER VI. Self-Examination--Dentistry--The Midnight Charm--Witches and
Explains
CHAPTER XXII. Tom's Confidence Betrayed--Expects Signal Punishment
CHAPTER XXVI. The Haunted House--Sleepy Ghosts--A Box of Gold--Bitter Luck
--An Expedition to the Cave--Protection Against Ghosts--"An Awful Snug
Examination Evening
The Next Day's Conference
were experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were schoolmates
She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but
barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood
where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of
In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into
misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This new
than himself. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-pressive
"Oh yes--I've seen whole families in the same fix."
flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said:
"Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next
threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out."
fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a
fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at
to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend to my own
would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and
examined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an exchange
hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:
Sid. Now don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this fence
Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for
six fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass door-knob, a
and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect,
hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged,
the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the
minute--only while he could button the flower inside his jacket, next
his heart--or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not much posted in
off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom
so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the old
next instant he was sprawling on the floor! The potent palm was uplifted
Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But when
Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart
and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such a luxury to
Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental
there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in
his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and
tree-box on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom dropped back a step
Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy
blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be exchanged for it; ten red
occasions, before company, the superintendent (as Tom expressed it)
and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases of
small newcomer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a moment. The next
fascinate a girl and win her applause. His exaltation had but one
pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty warning fingers
both sexes, found business up at the library, by the pulpit; and it was
(with much seeming vexation). The little girls "showed off" in various
and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a prodigy.
expecting an application from this source for the next ten years. But
troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went--came again; she watched;
Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom being placed next
new notable from a distance; next the belle of the village, followed by
cannot express it; it is too beautiful, TOO beautiful for this mortal
the body, and the slender thread of a neck was exposed to view; scraping
The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an
was in a percussion-cap box. The first thing the beetle did was to
and continued his experiments; grew weary at last, and then indifferent
Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest and then
Tom?" And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.
upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and admirable
way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the exhibition;
Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been the
the percussion-cap box came out. He released the tick and put him on
Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and
pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner.
tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as
anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would
against the bench in excess of contentment.
moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:
her to exchange sorrows with.
exalted into the vague august realm of the romantic. No, he would be
home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore
Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle. He took it
He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said:
began. Next the ghastly ticking of a death-watch in the wall at the
moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid face.
Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed:
"Here, now, don't you hit my pard!" and the next moment he had grappled
did. It was all on account of the whiskey and the excitement, I reckon.
Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed
through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering
pressure on the up-strokes. [See next page.]
to exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on the night
"Oh, geeminy, it's _him_!" exclaimed both boys, in a breath.
in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday?"
the night was almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution, and
trying to get away--he only looked doubtful and perplexed.
look at his work, I reckon--didn't expect any company."
exclaimed:
stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every
producing health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in
and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to take, and
She gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the
against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general havoc. Next
her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter.
by anxiety. Too late he divined her "drift." The handle of the telltale
in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next instant he
He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came war-whooping
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was
in stores or having a spree, but still that was no excuse for their
the next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was passing before
free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited island,
fragrant smoke--he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment. The
next they thought of the stolen meat, and then the real torture came.
more than once. A tumblebug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and
of the "fox" kind came skurrying along, sitting up at intervals to
open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of hunger make, too.
and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition. They
"What is it!" exclaimed Joe, under his breath.
ferryboat's side, and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud, that same
"I know now!" exclaimed Tom; "somebody's drownded!"
be expected to act very intelligently when set upon an errand of such
flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed:
excitement was gone, now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly "explained," and was glad to get
Joe followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow motionless, for some time,
expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till
exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took
then the small raft had been missed; next, certain boys said the missing
had gone off on that raft and would turn up at the next town below,
Missouri shore some five or six miles below the village--and then hope
straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.
tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and
"Which he is!" exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
other pirates got ready to fish and explore.
they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole. They were perfectly
When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the dry,
Next they got their marbles and played "knucks" and "ringtaw" and
"I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys. We'll explore
excuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret
grow disjointed. The silences widened; the expectoration marvellously
"Quick! boys, go for the tent!" exclaimed Tom.
thunderpeals came now in ear-splitting explosive bursts, keen and sharp,
sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to burn again. Then they
and after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified their
other by thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an extremely
in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations. We will leave them to
the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and then added
who _did_ see the departed last, and exchanged the last words with them,
When the Sunday-school hour was finished, the next morning, the bell
was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly
hymn was sung, and the text followed: "I am the Resurrection and the
his handkerchief, and stood transfixed! First one and then another pair
the aisle, Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of drooping rags,
poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what
expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.
Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six miles
bed, and Sid was sitting by the woodbox, and Mary next to him."
Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then
"Oh, it's all getting just as bright as day, now. Next you said I warn't
had what her sex call "a good cry." Then she sat moody, with wounded
wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along, as they walked,
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly
exclaiming: "Oh, here's a jolly one! look at this!" she lost patience at
softy, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbage about
The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned
If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred Temple, Tom's
glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant she had the
turned the key, and burst out crying with shame and vexation.
out of the house with a new explosion of crying.
right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it
up no exultation that was really worthy the name. Presently the
did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he
for Becky now, he said. The next moment the master faced the school.
Another negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling
from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of the
The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a
and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good
showing on "Examination" day. His rod and his ferule were seldom idle
condition on Examination Evening he would "manage the thing" while he
six rows in front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town
scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the evening; rows of
The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited,
"You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage,"
etc.--accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic
Down," and other declamatory gems. Then there were reading exercises,
ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention to "expression"
Let us return to the "Examination." The first composition that was read
extract from it:
after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is
Next appeared a dark-complexioned, black-eyed, black-haired young lady,
who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression, and began
exerted over its terror by the illustrious Franklin! Even the boisterous
the word "beauteous" was over-fondled, and human experience referred to
America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he
within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head--down, down, a little
Western Lady"--but they are exactly and precisely after the schoolgirl
worn his shackles over forty-eight hours--and fixed his hopes upon old
He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the
extremity of endurance and that this was the result. It might have
getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf from
The next day the doctors were back; Tom had relapsed. The three weeks he
The next day and the day after, he hung about the courtroom, drawn by an
Huck was having the same experience. They studiously avoided each other.
was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was hours before he got to
sleep. All the village flocked to the courthouse the next morning, for
this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about equally represented
The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse.
brought out by credible witnesses, but none of them were cross-examined
by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house
expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench.
A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even excepting
but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips and
emotion reached its climax when the boy said:
Tom's days were days of splendor and exultation to him, but his nights
but failed of success. Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone fishing.
worth six bits or a dollar."
"Where you going to dig next, after we get this one?"
murdered, anyway--but nothing's ever been seen around that house except
caved in. The boys gazed awhile, half expecting to see a blue light flit
ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree; they had come
within six inches of it, and then somebody else had come along and
place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own
boldness, and wondering at it, too. Next they wanted to look upstairs.
spied around a little and think things look well for it. Then for Texas!
take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty in silver's
beyond all imagination! Six hundred dollars was money enough to make
"Half-rotten plank--no, it's a box, I believe. Here--bear a hand and we'll
The two men examined the handful of coins. They were gold. The boys
above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted.
himself, and then began to use it. The box was soon unearthed. It was
eyes. "I'll need your help in it. When it's finished--then Texas. Go home
see the ground disturbed? Not exactly--not exactly. We'll take it to my
twilight, and moved toward the river with their precious box.
no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed for
go into it or come out of it except at night; he did not know any
a season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a
excitement. In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer
momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away
"Say, Tom, did you see that box?"
"Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't see
say, Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if Injun Joe's
snatch that box quicker'n lightning."
and they had an exhausting good time playing "hispy" and "gully-keeper"
the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic, and she
and pleasurable anticipation. Tom's excitement enabled him to keep
with, next day; but he was disappointed. No signal came that night.
the box of money another time that day.
junction sixty feet overhead. This main avenue was not more than
with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for
door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the brick store. The next
his arm. It must be that box! So they were going to remove the treasure.
Why call Tom now? It would be absurd--the men would get away with the box
next--which was--
exclaimed the old man; "out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad."
bowlder and fell to listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence, and
then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry.
on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call came from a
sprang up and exclaimed:
Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too
to bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for
did give you that turn? What were _you_ expecting we'd found?"
a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel
at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact, everything seemed to be
Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled the
"Is my Becky going to sleep all day? I just expected she would be tired
marked anxiety came into Aunt Polly's face.
uneasiness took possession of every countenance. Children were anxiously
engaged in it with zeal until the exertion began to grow a trifle
shadows. He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would
"Can you find the way, Tom? It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me."
out it will be an awful fix. Let's try some other way, so as not to go
examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he
come back! No--I can't find the way. It's all mixed up."
talked hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no
would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the
next moment, to see the "Spaniard" take to his heels and get himself out
and that the search had been given over. He proposed to explore another
not be long. She told Tom to go with the kite-line and explore if he
on an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his
speck of daylight and would not have explored that passage any more! He
adventure and introduce no exciting topic. The Widow Douglas stayed by
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting
eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer
experience how this wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but
British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the massacre at Lexington was
ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right."
struggle and expire.
cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box."
great rock stood in. The boys examined three of them with no result.
was no moneybox. The lads searched and researched this place, but in
to explore. He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended
exclaimed:
It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern,
out. Lemme see if I can lift the box."
Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other with a perplexed
a moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom said
"I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it
sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible. It was talked
tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every "haunted"
The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge
and all just fixed to rob, here this dern foolishness has got to come up
exactly where to stop--that is, with a marriage; but when he writes of
